Brexit (; a portmanteau of "Britain" and "Exit") was the withdrawal of the United Kingdom (UK) from the European Union (EU).
Brexit took place at 23:00 GMT on 31 January 2020 (00:00 1 February 2020 CET). The UK, which joined the EU precursor, the European Communities (EC), on 1 January 1973, is the only member state to have withdrawn, although four overseas territories of member states had previously ceased to exercise membership. Following Brexit, EU law and the Court of Justice of the European Union no longer have primacy over British law but the UK remains bound by obligations in treaties it has with other countries around the world, including many with EU member states and with the EU itself. The European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 retains relevant EU law as domestic law, which the UK can amend or repeal.
The EU and its institutions developed gradually after their establishment. Throughout the period of British membership, Eurosceptic groups had existed in the UK, opposing aspects of the EU and its predecessors. The Labour prime minister Harold Wilson's pro-EC government held a referendum on continued EC membership in 1975, in which 67.2% voted to stay. Despite growing political opposition by a minority of UK politicians to further European integration aimed at "ever closer union" between 1975–2016, from factions of the Conservative Party in the 1980s–2000s, no further referendums on the issue were held.
By the mid-2010s, the growing popularity of the UK Independence Party (UKIP), as well as pressure from Eurosceptics within his own party, persuaded the Conservative prime minister David Cameron to promise a referendum on British membership of the EU if his government was re-elected. Following the 2015 general election, which produced a small but unexpected majority for the governing Conservative Party, the promised referendum on continued EU membership was held on 23 June 2016. Supporters of the Remain campaign included then-prime minister David Cameron, the fu